# Generating images with DALL-E-3

The `DallETools` toolset allows the agent to generate images using DALL-E-3. Providing an image prompt to the agent, in addition to the main prompt you can specify:

- Quality: `hd`or `standard` the default is standard
- Aspect ratio: `square`, `wide`, `tall` the default is square*.  These correspond to image resolutions of 1024x0124, 1792x1024 and 1024x1792 respectively.
- Style: `vivid` or `natural` the default is vivid. Vivid causes the model to lean towards generating hyper-real and dramatic images. Natural causes the model to produce more natural, less hyper-real looking images

Note: These are the Open AI defaults.

The prompt section for this is pretty basic, however it does try to steer the model to pick the proper aspect ratio based on the type of image being created.

The tool will output a message to the chat stream with the prompt it's sending over to DALL-E-3, then a MediaRender event to display the image and optionally a chat message with the ACTUAL prompt DALL-E ran.  It will sometimes modify your prompt to include diversity or to add details.


## Keeping your images
By default the MediaRender event is for the temporal URL generated by DALL-E-3.  Those are only good for an hour and will need to be saved manually. Setting the `DALLE_IMAGE_SAVE_FOLDER` in your `.env` file to a folder on your system will map a local storage workspace into the tool allowing it to save both the image as well as all of the parameters that generated it the hard disk.

## Scene Guru
The file `personas/scene_guru.md` can be used with `--prompt_file` to enable a persona that's intended to help you generate interesting scenes to generate in DALL-E-3.  It's a quick and dirty port of an old prompt I had for Midjourney but it does a fairly decent job and I'm not making a new art tool right now.
